Docs/examples (#151)
a-sit-plus/signum: docs/docs/examples.md

          publicKey = signer.publicKey,
          attributes = listOf(
              Pkcs10CertificationRequestAttribute(
                  // No OID is assigned for this; choose one!
                  attestationOid,
                                      // ↓↓↓ contains challenge ↓↓↓
                  Asn1String.UTF8(signer.attestation!!.jsonEncoded).encodeToTlv()
              )
          )
      )

      //extension function producing a signed CSR
      val csr = signer.sign(tbsCSR).getOrElse { TODO("handle error") }
      ```
7. The back-end verifies tha signature of the CSR, and validates the challenge (and attestation information, if present)
      ```kotlin
       X509SignatureAlgorithm.ES256.verifierFor(csr.tbsCsr.publicKey)
           .getOrElse { TODO("Handle error") }
           .verify(
               csr.tbsCsr.encodeToDer(),
               CryptoSignature.decodeFromDer(csr.signature)
           ).getOrElse { TODO("Abort here!") }

       val attestation =
           csr.tbsCsr.attributes?.firstOrNull { it.oid == attestationOid }
               ?.value?.first() ?: TODO("Abort here!")
      //TODO: feed attestation to WARDEN for verification
      ```

> 8. The back-end issues and signs a _binding certificate_ for the CSR, stores it to identify the client, and transmits it to the client.

Author: i surrounded it with braces

> 8. The back-end issues and signs a _binding certificate_ for the CSR, stores it to identify the client, and transmits it to the client.

Reviewer: remove as per offline discussion

> 8. The back-end issues and signs a _binding certificate_ for the CSR, stores it to identify the client, and transmits it to the client.

Author: done

             X509CertificateExtension(
             attestedClientOid,
             critical = true,
             Asn1PrimitiveOctetString(byteArrayOf())
           )
         )
       )

       val clientCertificate = signer.sign(tbsCrt).getOrElse { TODO("handle error") }
       ```
9. The client stores the certificate.

To recap: This example shows how to
* instantiate a signer for a hardware-backed, biometry-protected, attested key
* instantiate a verifier
* create, sign and verify CSRs with a custom attribute
* extract a custom attribute from a CSR
* create, and sign a certificate with a custom critical extension

## Creating a Signed JSON Web Signature Object (`JwsSigned`)

!!! info  inline end
    This example requires the _Supreme_ KMP crypto provider and _Indispensable Josef_.

In this example, we'll start with an ephemeral P-256 signer: 

```kotlin
val signer = Signer.Ephemeral {
    ec { curve = ECCurve.SECP_256_R_1 }
}.getOrThrow() //TODO handle error properly
```

Next up, we'll create a header and payload:

```kotlin
val header = JwsHeader(
    algorithm = signer.signatureAlgorithm.toJwsAlgorithm().getOrThrow(),
    jsonWebKey = signer.publicKey.toJsonWebKey()

> )

Author: API issue not docs

> )

Reviewer: do we have an issue tracking all of the API issues surfaced in these discussions?

> )

Author: now we do: #180

val payload = byteArrayOf(1, 3, 3, 7)
```

Since both header and payload are fed into the signature, we need to prepare this signature input:

```kotlin

> val plainSignatureInput = JwsSigned.prepareJwsSignatureInput(header, payload)

Author: api issue not docs

```

Now, everything is ready to be signed:

```kotlin
val signature = signer.sign(plainSignatureInput.encodeToByteArray()).signature //TODO: handle error
JwsSigned(header, payload, signature, plainSignatureInput).serialize() // this we can verify on jwt.io 
```

As can be seen, a `JwsSigned` takes header, payload, signature, and the plain signature input as parameters.

> The reason for keeping this fourth parameter is convenience and efficiency: For one, you need this input to serialize a

Author: yes, but this needs more discussion than this PR is good good for

`JwsSigned`, so it would be a waste to discard it. After parsing a `JswSigned` from its serialized form, you also need the 
`plainSignatureInput` to verify everything was signed correctly.

## Creating a `CoseSigned` Object

!!! info  inline end
    This example requires the _Supreme_ KMP crypto provider and _Indispensable Cosef_.

In this example, we'll again start with an ephemeral P-256 signer:

```kotlin
val signer = Signer.Ephemeral {
    ec { curve = ECCurve.SECP_256_R_1 }
}.getOrThrow() //TODO handle error properly
```

Next up, we'll create a header and payload:

```kotlin
//set KID + algorithm
val protectedHeader = CoseHeader(

>     algorithm = signer.signatureAlgorithm.toCoseAlgorithm().getOrElse { TODO() },

Author: yup

    kid = signer.publicKey.didEncoded.encodeToByteArray()
)

val payload = byteArrayOf(0xC, 0xA, 0xF, 0xE)
```

Both of these are signature inputs, so we'll construct a `CoseSignatureInput` to sign.

```kotlin
val signatureInput = CoseSignatureInput(
    contextString = "Signature1",
    protectedHeader = ByteStringWrapper(protectedHeader),
    externalAad = byteArrayOf(),
    payload = payload,
).serialize()
```

> Now, everything is ready to be signed:

Reviewer: this should have taken one line

Author: ?

Reviewer: same as above; you have correctly identified that this is a really common use case, but the correct fix is to make it take one line, not to have a documentation example that takes many lines

Author: which is why we have an open issue for this. and since it requires a larger revamp with additional modules etc. we document it for now, because this PR is the wrong place for it

```kotlin
val signature = signer.sign(signatureInput).signature //TODO handle error

val coseSigned = CoseSigned(
    ByteStringWrapper(protectedHeader),
    unprotectedHeader = null,
    payload,
    signature
).serialize() // sadly, there's no cwt.io, but you can use cbor.me to explore the signed data
```

> ## Create and Parse a Custom-Tagged ASN.1 Structure

Reviewer: change framing

Application 1337 (2 elem)
  INTEGER 1
  OCTET STRING (19 byte)
    Application 42 (1 byte) 00
    UTCTime 2024-09-30 18:11:59 UTC
```

</td>

<td>

```asn1
Application 1337 (2 elem)
  INTEGER 3
  OCTET STRING (7 byte)
    Application 42 (1 byte) FF
    INTEGER 39
```

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### Encoding

We'll be assuming absolute time to keep things simple.
Hence, the structure containing an absolute time can be created using the _Indispensable_ ASN.1 engine as follows:

```kotlin
val TAG_TIME_RELATIVE = 42uL withClass TagClass.APPLICATION

Asn1.Sequence {
    +Asn1.Int(1)
    +OctetStringEncapsulating {
        +(Bool(false) withImplicitTag TAG_TIME_RELATIVE)
        +Asn1Time(Clock.System.now())
    }
} withImplicitTag (1337uL withClass TagClass.APPLICATION) 
//                ↑ in reality this would be a constant ↑ 
```

The HEX-equivalent of this structure (which can be obtained by calling `.toDerHexString()`) is
[7F8A391802010104135F2A0100170D3234303933303138313135395A](https://lapo.it/asn1js/#f4o5GAIBAQQTXyoBABcNMjQwOTMwMTgxMTU5Wg).

### Parsing and Validating Tags

Basic parsing is straight-forward: You have DER-encoded bytes, and feed them into `AsnElement.parse()`.

> Then you examine the first child to get the number of times the operation was carried out,

Reviewer: this makes it sound like this applies to all ASN.1 structures; i don't think this is the case?

decode the first child of the OCTET STRING that follows to see if n UTC time or an int follows.

Usually, though (and especially when using implicit tags), you really want to verify those tags too.
Hence, parsing and properly validating is a bit more elaborate:

```kotlin linenums="1"
Asn1Element.parse(customSequence.derEncoded).asStructure().let { root -> 

  //↓↓↓ In reality, this would be a global constant; the same as in the previous snippet ↓↓↓
  val rootTag = Asn1Element.Tag(1337uL, tagClass = TagClass.APPLICATION, constructed = true)

>   assertTag(rootTag) //throws on tag mismatch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  root.assertTag(rootTag) //throws on tag mismatch
```

  val numberOfOps = root.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToUInt()
  root.nextChild().asEncapsulatingOctetString().let { timestamp ->
    val isRelative = timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive()
      .decode(TAG_TIME_RELATIVE) { Boolean.decodeFromAsn1ContentBytes(it) }

    val time = if (isRelative) timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToUInt()
    else timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToInstant()

    if (timestamp.hasMoreChildren() || root.hasMoreChildren())
      throw Asn1StructuralException("Superfluous Content")
      
    // Everything is parsed and validated
    TODO("Create domain object from $numberOfOps, $isRelative, and $time")
    }
}
```

The above snippet performs the following validations:

> 1. Line 5 asserts the tag or the root structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Line 5 asserts the tag of the root structure
```

# Signum Examples

This page demonstrates how to accomplish common tasks using _Signum_.

## Creating a Signed JSON Web Signature Object (`JwsSigned`)

!!! info  inline end
    This example requires the _Supreme_ KMP crypto provider and _Indispensable Josef_.

In this example, we'll start with an ephemeral P-256 signer: 

```kotlin
val signer = Signer.Ephemeral {
    ec { curve = ECCurve.SECP_256_R_1 }
}.getOrThrow() //TODO handle error properly
```

Next up, we'll create a header and payload:

```kotlin
val header = JwsHeader(
    algorithm = signer.signatureAlgorithm.toJwsAlgorithm().getOrThrow(),
    jsonWebKey = signer.publicKey.toJsonWebKey()
)
val payload = byteArrayOf(1, 3, 3, 7)
```

Since both header and payload are fed into the signature, we need to prepare this signature input:

```kotlin
val plainSignatureInput = JwsSigned.prepareJwsSignatureInput(header, payload)
```

Now, everything is ready to be signed:

```kotlin

> val signature = signer.sign(plainSignatureInput.encodeToByteArray()).signature //TODO: handle error

Reviewer: should `prepareJwsSignatureInput` return `ByteArray`? I don't see a use case for it returning `String`

Author: Well, we're talking JSON here, so everything's a string. therefore, you need this string to construct the JwsSigned.

Reviewer: yes, but a "signature input" is bytes; the fact that those bytes contain a json representation is an implementation detail; imo `prepare...SignatureInput` should return `ByteArray` instead of the caller having to explicitly do string -> bytes

Author: this is literally the string that is in the JWT. @nodh your take?

    kid = signer.publicKey.didEncoded.encodeToByteArray()
)

val payload = byteArrayOf(0xC, 0xA, 0xF, 0xE)
```

Both of these are signature inputs, so we'll construct a `CoseSignatureInput` to sign.

```kotlin
val signatureInput = CoseSignatureInput(
    contextString = "Signature1",
    protectedHeader = ByteStringWrapper(protectedHeader),
    externalAad = byteArrayOf(),
    payload = payload,
).serialize()
```

Now, everything is ready to be signed:

```kotlin
val signature = signer.sign(signatureInput).signature //TODO handle error

val coseSigned = CoseSigned(
    ByteStringWrapper(protectedHeader),
    unprotectedHeader = null,
    payload,
    signature
).serialize() // sadly, there's no cwt.io, but you can use cbor.me to explore the signed data
```

## Create and Parse a Custom-Tagged ASN.1 Structure

!!! info inline end
    This example requires only the _Indispensable_ module.

This example illustrates how to encapsulate a custom ASN.1 encoding scheme to make it reusable and composable.

### Definitions

Let's say you are using ASN.1 as your wire format for interoperability with different frameworks and languages.

> This particular example demonstrates log reporting, i.e. the status of an operation, maybe from a smartcard is sent off-device.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This particular example demonstrates how log messages, i.e. the status of an operation, maybe from a smartcard, are sent off-device.
```

!!! note inline end
    Such constraints may seem artificial, but when bandwidth is low, a compact representation is key.

> A log message is an implicitly tagged ASN.1 structure with APPLICATION tag `1337` and sequence semantics.

Reviewer: "compact representation is key" -> chooses a tag that doesn't fit into a single byte 😈

Application 1337 (2 elem)
  INTEGER 1
  OCTET STRING (19 byte)
    Application 42 (1 byte) 00
    UTCTime 2024-09-30 18:11:59 UTC
```

</td>

<td>

```asn1
Application 1337 (2 elem)
  INTEGER 3
  OCTET STRING (7 byte)
    Application 42 (1 byte) FF
    INTEGER 39
```

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### Encoding

We'll be assuming absolute time to keep things simple.
Hence, the structure containing an absolute time can be created using the _Indispensable_ ASN.1 engine as follows:

```kotlin
val TAG_TIME_RELATIVE = 42uL withClass TagClass.APPLICATION

Asn1.Sequence {
    +Asn1.Int(1)
    +OctetStringEncapsulating {
        +(Bool(false) withImplicitTag TAG_TIME_RELATIVE)
        +Asn1Time(Clock.System.now())
    }
} withImplicitTag (1337uL withClass TagClass.APPLICATION) 
//                ↑ in reality this would be a constant ↑ 
```

The HEX-equivalent of this structure (which can be obtained by calling `.toDerHexString()`) is
[7F8A391802010104135F2A0100170D3234303933303138313135395A](https://lapo.it/asn1js/#f4o5GAIBAQQTXyoBABcNMjQwOTMwMTgxMTU5Wg).

### Parsing and Validating Tags

Basic parsing is straight-forward: You have DER-encoded bytes, and feed them into `AsnElement.parse()`.

> In this example, you then examine the first child to get the number of times the operation was carried out,
> decode the first child of the OCTET STRING that follows to see if n UTC time or an int follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, you examine the first child to get the number of times the operation was carried out;
then, you decode the first child of the OCTET STRING that follows to decide how to decode the second child.
```

Usually, though (and especially when using implicit tags), you really want to verify those tags too.
Hence, parsing and properly validating is a bit more elaborate:

```kotlin linenums="1"
Asn1Element.parse(customSequence.derEncoded).asStructure().let { root -> 

  //↓↓↓ In reality, this would be a global constant; the same as in the previous snippet ↓↓↓
  val rootTag = Asn1Element.Tag(1337uL, tagClass = TagClass.APPLICATION, constructed = true)
  root.assertTag(rootTag) //throws on tag mismatch

  val numberOfOps = root.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToUInt()
  root.nextChild().asEncapsulatingOctetString().let { timestamp ->
    val isRelative = timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive()

>       .decode(TAG_TIME_RELATIVE) { Boolean.decodeFromAsn1ContentBytes(it) }

Reviewer: is there really no `.decodeBoolean` or similar? or even better, `.decode<Boolean>(tag)`?

Author: we have a generic decode for anything custom (i.e. implicitly tagged). `decodeBoolean` expects a boolean tag. as per documentation, decoding primitives is implemented as `<Primitive>.decodeFromAsn1ContentBytes(bytes)`

Reviewer: then `.decodeBoolean(tag: Tag = TAG_BOOLEAN)`? this is a lot of characters for a very simple operation

Author: essentially, you want every  `.decodeXXX` function to have a tag override? sounds reasonable!

Author: done

    val time = if (isRelative) timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToUInt()
    else timestamp.nextChild().asPrimitive().decodeToInstant()

    if (timestamp.hasMoreChildren() || root.hasMoreChildren())
      throw Asn1StructuralException("Superfluous Content")
      
    // Everything is parsed and validated
    TODO("Create domain object from $numberOfOps, $isRelative, and $time")

>     }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
```

}
```

The above snippet performs the following validations:

1. Line 5 asserts the tag of the root structure
2. Line 7 ensures that the first child is an ASN.1 primitive tagged as INT, containing an unsigned integer
3. Line 8 execution successfully guarantees that the second child is indeed an ASN.1 OCTET STRING encapsulating
another ASN.1 structure.
4. Lines 9-10 verify that the first child contained in the ASN.1 OCTET STRING
    * is an ASN.1 primitive
    * tagged with `TAG_TIME_RELATIVE`
    * containing an ASN.1 boolean
5. Line 12 ensures that the next child is an ASN.1 primitive, encoding an unsigned integer (in case an `UInt` is expected)
6. Line 13 tackles the alternative and ensures that the next child contains a properly encoded ASN.1 time

> 7. Lastly, lines 15-16 make sure no additional content is present, thus fully verifying the structure as a whole.

Reviewer: should we not do this automatically in `asEncapsulatingOctetString` after executing the user-supplied block? maybe adding the option to disable it with `strict = false`?

Author: ?

Reviewer: i misunderstood what the code does. either way, proposing:
```kotlin
fun <T> @ICouldBeWrongAboutWhatClassThisIsDefinedOn Asn1Primitive.parseEncapsulatedOctetString(block: (@NotSureWhichClass Asn1Something)->T) : T {
  val os = asEncapsulatingOctetString()
  return block(os).also {
    if (os.hasMoreChildren()) throw Asn1StructuralException("Superfluous Content")
  }
}
```

Reviewer: and the same thing for the use case with `Asn1Element.parse(bla).asStructure().let { ... }`, we should have a "parse using this block and then verify that we consumed everything" helper

Author: now it makes sense! I agree: #184

## Issuing Binding Certificates

!!! info  inline end
    This example requires the _Supreme_ KMP crypto provider. Only _Signum_-specifics are illustrated using code snippets.

We'll assume a JVM backend using _[WARDEN](https://github.com/a-sit-plus/warden)_ and trust anchors all set up correctly
on the client apps.
A common pattern in a mobile client setting in the context of banking or eID are so-called _binding certificates_ (or binding keys, but we'll stick to certificates here).
Just assume a bank with a mobile client application: Customers are typically issued an activation token out-of-band
(via mail, by the teller, …). This token is used to activate the app and transactions can then be authorized using biometrics.

In settings as critical as eID and banking, the service operator typically wants to ensure that only uncompromised clients

> may access a service. To ensure this, the example described here relies on attestation.

Reviewer: "on attestation" -- app, or key? "only uncompromised clients" sounds like app attestation, but i think what we're doing is key attestation?

Reviewer: though i guess that's a distinction made at the back-end, since "app attestation" is just attribute checking in the key attestation certificate?

This process works more or less as follows:

1. The client contacts the back-end to start the binding process
2. The back-end authenticates the binding request, identifying the customer. This could be a traditional authentication process, some out-of-band personalized token, etc.
3. The user enters this information into the client app and the app transmits this information to the back-end.
4. The back-end sends a challenge to the client
5. The client creates a new public-private key pair, using the challenge to also attest app, key, and the biometric authorization requirement (see [Attestation](supreme.md#attestation)).
   ```kotlin
   val signer = PlatformSigningProvider.createSigningKey("binding") {
     ec { curve = ECCurve.SECP_256_R_1 }
     hardware {
        backing = REQUIRED
        attestation { challenge = challengeFromServer }
        protection {
            factors { biometry = true }
        }
     }
   }.getOrElse { TODO("Handle error") }
   ```
6. The client creates and signs a CSR for the key, which includes the challenge and an attestation proof

>       ```kotlin

Reviewer: indentation is inconsistent between 5., 6., 7.,  and 8.

      val tbsCSR = TbsCertificationRequest(

>           subjectName = listOf(RelativeDistinguishedName(AttributeTypeAndValue.CommonName(Asn1String.UTF8("client")))),

Reviewer: note this down as one of the things that should definitely have a convenience helper

Author: #183

          publicKey = signer.publicKey,
          attributes = listOf(
              Pkcs10CertificationRequestAttribute(
                  // No OID is assigned for this; choose one!
                  attestationOid,
                                      // ↓↓↓ contains challenge ↓↓↓
                  Asn1String.UTF8(signer.attestation!!.jsonEncoded).encodeToTlv()
              )
          )
      )

      //extension function producing a signed CSR
      val csr = signer.sign(tbsCSR).getOrElse { TODO("handle error") }
      ```

> 7. The back-end verifies tha signature of the CSR, and validates the challenge (and attestation information, if present)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. The back-end verifies the signature of the CSR, and validates the challenge and attestation information
```

      ```kotlin
       X509SignatureAlgorithm.ES256.verifierFor(csr.tbsCsr.publicKey)
           .getOrElse { TODO("Handle error") }
           .verify(
               csr.tbsCsr.encodeToDer(),
               CryptoSignature.decodeFromDer(csr.signature)
           ).getOrElse { TODO("Abort here!") }

       val attestation =
           csr.tbsCsr.attributes.firstOrNull { it.oid == attestationOid }
               ?.value?.first() ?: TODO("Abort here!")
      //TODO: feed attestation to WARDEN for verification
      ```
8. The back-end issues and signs a _binding certificate_ for the CSR, and transmits it to the client.
```kotlin
val tbsCrt = TbsCertificate(
    serialNumber = Random.nextBytes(16),
    signatureAlgorithm = signer.signatureAlgorithm.toX509SignatureAlgorithm().getOrThrow(),
    issuerName = backendIssuerName,
    validFrom = Asn1Time(Clock.System.now()),
    validUntil = Asn1Time(Clock.System.now() + VALIDITY),
    subjectName = listOf(RelativeDistinguishedName(AttributeTypeAndValue.CommonName(Asn1String.UTF8("client")))),

>     publicKey = ISSUER_KEY,

Reviewer: should this not be the subject key?
